17 March 2005Cabinet was yesterday (16 March) briefed on preparations for the National Anti-Corruption Summit that will take place during the course of next week, 22 - 23 March. The Summit will bring together government and civil society structures as partners in strengthening the fight against corruption in all areas of social endeavour. Government does pride itself with the steps it has taken since the first national summit in 1999, which include a public service anti-corruption strategy, progressive legislation on such issues as administrative justice and protection of whistleblowers, a toll-free number (0800 701 701) and the setting up or strengthening of specialised bodies such as the DSO (Scorpions) and the Special Investigating Unit. Government will seek to ensure that the second National Anti-Corruption Summit emerges with a programme with tangible outcomes that can be implemented by all sectors, and with improved co-ordinating structures among all the partners. The following statutes were approved for submission to Parliament: On the issue of Zimbabwe, Cabinet reiterated the position of our government that a lasting solution to the challenges in that country would be found by the people of Zimbabwe themselves. Southern African Development Community (SADC) and countries in other regions can only assist in this regard. In respect of the elections, the South African government is of the view that it would be wrong for anyone to prejudge the conduct or outcome of an election yet to take place. Government has noted the steps taken thus far to create an environment for free political activity as well as the concerns that have been raised on issues pertaining to the voters' roll and the right to hold political gatherings. In this regard, the government will rely on the various Observer Missions in Zimbabwe (and any other channels) to liaise with the role-players and assist in ensuring that any challenges that emerge in the conduct of the elections are resolved. This we shall do in the conviction that it would not be in the interest of the people of Zimbabwe or that of the people of our region that anyone in that country acts in a manner that militates against the elections being legitimate, free and fair. The following appointments were approved: Cabinet was briefed on the process towards the appointment of the one-person Commission on the Directorate of Special Operations. The Commission will, among other issues, examine the rationale behind the establishment of the Directorate, its mandate and relationship with other security and intelligence agencies, how to strengthen integrated efforts against organised crime, and options regarding the appropriate location of the Directorate. The President, in consultation with the Ministerial Co-ordinating Committee set up in terms of Section 31 of the National Prosecution Authority Act, has appointed Judge Sisi Khampepe as the Commissioner. It is envisaged that the Commission will complete its work in about 4 months. Cabinet was informed of the programme for the President's Imbizo in the Northern Cape from 17 to 19 March. This will be the President's ninth provincial imbizo visit, thus completing the first round of such visits to all Provinces since 2001. A new round of such visits will be arranged for the future. The President's imbizo will be followed by a National Imbizo Focus Week on 7 to 13 April involving members of the Executive in all three spheres of government. Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top